---
title: 'GPS & Navigation'
date: 2012-08-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - GPS
  - Technology
  - Satire
---

We are covering navigation and GPS in this week’s blog and, unsurprisingly, I don’t know what direction to go in (ba dum tss). This is a topic that, for me, represents a bit of the disconnect between my existence and the life of my family and previous generations. Some inventions that were groundbreaking that it is hard to envision the world without them. Once, we waited wistfully while watching worried mothers myopically mark maps mere minuets before a road trip. This time has since been replaced. It may be a sign of the times that 99% of readers think a Thomas Guide is an instruction manual for an anthropomorphic train.

This is not to pretend things were better in the past or that the present (and future) are doom and gloom. GPS is incredible. The ability for us to locate anything we want instantly is now accepted as part of reality. To type “car repair near me” and have a computer tell us exactly where to go and how to get there barely causes us to raise our eyebrows. The lack of continuous gratitude for GPS is not surpising. The hit TV show Legend of Korra offers a prime example of this. In the show, Republic City daily life would not be complete without metal benders on every corner enforcing justice. However, when Toph invented metal bending for the first time everyone lost their minds.

Moving into the real world (sigh…), GPS has changed what it feels like to interact with our environment. We walk around cities we have never been before with the confidence and grace of a local. We have our phones tell us what locations have services that might interest us. It all seems to good to be true. This is not to say there are costs to the omnipresence of GPS and navigational aids, in fact, there has been a great deal lost to us due to the advent of these technologies. The two biggest experiences these devices rob us of is the thrill of being lost and the joy of truly getting to know one’s city. Having lived in Boston for 4 years you might expect most college seniors to know there way around town. However, my friends spend every weekend in the city and cannot walk from Fenway to the Boston Common without pulling out their cell phones. I had the same problem until I decided to start walking through the city and getting lost on weekends. At first the city seemed alien and threatening. However, as I began to know more about the city, I started learning about unique shortcuts and interesting parks that were seemingly tucked in the middle of nowhere. GPS acts as a shortcut, you will always find yourself in the right place, but what a price you pay for missing the journey.

I think introduction of GPS is a good example about the balance that must be walked with new technologies. GPS is incredible. It is are undeniably a step forward. Yet, it limits a lot of our experience and has a nasty habit of further tethering us in the future. What is the point of a trip if you already know where you are going. Instead of the experience being walking across the city, GPS keeps you focused on your next destination. In this way, GPS can guide our attention away from the time frame that makes us happiest: the present. If we consider life as a road trip, would we really want a GPS to ensure we make it to the end untouched on the fastest and most generic path? I take criticism for blowing things out of proportion, (and you can see why) but navigational tools and GPS could be used to accomplish so much more. Imagine if Google had a setting for exploratory based navigation. If you had a directional arrow facing the location of your destination, and you still got to choose a path. How many hidden gems in terms of parks, statues, unique architecture, and new paths would you discover?
